docs(ai): add derivation, execution, and fault-proofs AI guides; expand contract-dev (#21293)
ethereum-optimism/optimism: docs/ai/fault-proofs.md

# Fault Proofs Development

This document provides guidance for AI agents working with the fault proof system in
the Optimism monorepo: the Cannon MIPS VM, op-program, and the dispute game contracts.
See [go-dev.md](go-dev.md) for Go workflow and [contract-dev.md](contract-dev.md) for
the Solidity dispute game contracts.

## Scope

> - `cannon/` — MIPS32 VM that executes the op-program in single-step mode.

Author: ```suggestion
- `cannon/` — MIPS32 VM that executes kona-client in single-step mode.
```

Author: Applied your exact suggestion: ``cannon/`` is now "MIPS32 VM that executes kona-client in single-step mode." Same wording carried into the Cannon key-concept bullet.

🤖 *Generated by Claude Code*

> - `op-program/` — standalone Go binary that derives and executes L2 state.

Author: got removed! kona-client is now the primary fault proof program.

Author: Updated. op-program is no longer described as the FP program — **kona-client** (`rust/kona/bin/client`) is now stated as the primary fault proof program throughout: scope entry, key concept, and the determinism invariant (renamed to "kona-client determinism").

🤖 *Generated by Claude Code*

- `packages/contracts-bedrock/src/dispute/` — on-chain dispute game contracts.

## Key Concepts

- **Cannon**: a MIPS32 VM that executes the op-program in single-step mode, producing a
  reproducible execution trace.

> - **op-program**: a standalone Go binary that derives and executes L2 state.

Author: replace with kona-client, here and other places in doc.

Author: Swept the whole file — all op-program references are replaced with kona-client (intro, scope, key concepts, determinism invariant). The remaining `op-program` mentions in `acceptance-tests.md` (a build-target name) and `opgeth-decoupling.md` (correctly describes op-program as out-of-scope and superseded by kona) are accurate and left as-is.

🤖 *Generated by Claude Code*

- **Cannon**: a MIPS32 VM that executes kona-client in single-step mode, producing a
  reproducible execution trace.
- **kona-client**: the primary fault proof program — a Rust binary that derives and executes
  L2 state. It executes blocks via `op-revm`/`op-alloy` through `kona-executor`, not op-reth.
- **Dispute game**: an on-chain bisection game to resolve output root disputes.
- **Preimage oracle**: the mechanism for the VM to load external data (L1 blocks, L2 state).

## Invariants

- **kona-client determinism**: the same inputs always produce the same output root. kona-client
  must be fully deterministic — no network calls, no filesystem access at runtime; all external
  data is served through the preimage oracle.
- **Trace reproducibility**: the Cannon execution trace must be reproducible from any
  starting state.
- **Preimage fidelity**: the preimage oracle must serve exactly the data requested, with
  no corruption. Preimage key computation must match exactly between Go and Solidity.
- **Resolution finality**: dispute game resolution must be final and correct.

## Security Considerations

- VM instruction handling must produce identical results on-chain (Solidity) and

>   off-chain (Go). Memory access in Cannon must be bounds-checked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  off-chain (Rust/Go). Memory access in Cannon must be bounds-checked.
```

Author: **Claude says:** Applied — `off-chain (Go)` → `off-chain (Rust/Go)`, since Cannon now executes both kona-client (Rust) and op-program (Go) off-chain. (This one was missed in the maurelian-comments pass; thanks for the catch.) 🤖 *Generated by Claude Code*
